proposal: Add scalable rule storage proposal (#2661)
thanos-io/thanos: docs/proposals/202005_scalable-rule-storage.md

---
title: Scalable rule storage
type: proposal
menu: proposals
status: proposed
---

## Summary

There is no way to scale rule evaluation and storage today except functionally

> sharding rules onto multiple instances the `thanos rule` component. However, we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sharding rules onto multiple instances of the `thanos rule` component. However, we
```

Author: done

have already solved scaling storage of time-series across multiple processes:
`thanos receive`.

> To scale storing results of rule evaluations this proposal proposes to allow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To scale rule evaluations and storage this proposal proposes to allow
```

Author: done :)

the `thanos rule` component to have a stateless mode, storing results of
queries by sending it to a `thanos receive` hashring instead of storing them
locally.

## Motivation

A few large rules can create a significant amount of resulting time-series,
which should not be limited to what we can scale to with a single TSDB embedded

> in the rule component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the rule component.

Additionally, scaling out Ruler in terms of rule evaluations causes further defragmentation of TSDB blocks - as many of rules we have, that many of TSDB "streams" we have. While doable with vertical compaction, it might cause some operational complexity and unnecessary load on the system.
```

Author: Added some of this but rewrote it slightly, could you double check if that's what you were trying to say?

Reviewer: LGTM! thanks

> A few large rules can create a significant amount of resulting time-series,
> which should not be limited to what we can scale to with a single TSDB embedded
> in the rule component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A few large rules can create a significant amount of resulting time-series,
which limits the scalability of Thanos Rule, as it uses single embedded TSDB.
```

Author: yes that reads much better

## Goals

> Allow scaling storage of rule evaluations.

Reviewer: what about evaluations itself? Not a second goal here? (:

Author: added :)

## Verification

* Run all rule component e2e tests with new mode as well.

## Proposal

Allow specifying one of the following flags:

> * `--remote-storage`

Reviewer: Can we be more specifc? I think remote write? Also maybe we could use new gRPC based remote write for consistency? :thinking: 

The counter argument is that with normal remote write one can use any other system and deploy Thanos Ruler there (:

Author: I think we should start with the gRPC based one, and we can then as a second phase work on "generic" remote write

Author: Any suggestion on a better flag name?

Reviewer: `remote-write` would do as we technically ask to push somewhere.

I think `remote-storage` is fine as well (: Not a biggie

Author: renamed to remote-write

* `--remote-storage.config` or `--remote-storage.config-file` flag following the same scheme as
[`--query.config`, and
`--query.config-file`](https://thanos.io/components/rule.md/#query-api)

If any of these are specified the ruler would run a stateless mode, without
local storage, and instead writing samples to the configured remote server,
which must implement the `storepb.WritableStore` gRPC service.

## Alternatives

Continue to allow spreading load only by functionally sharding rules.

## Work Plan

Implement functionality alongside the existing architecture of the rule
component, and once tried and tested we can potentially remove today's
architecture.

> 

Reviewer 2: what will we remove here? I think embedded TSDB is here to stay?

Author: I'll move this to open questions instead. I think for now we are not touching the embedded TSDB approach, this may be reevaluated in the future though.

> Naturally this feature can only go out of experimental stage if the thanos
> receive component also does.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

As discussed in Thanos community meeting, we treat Receive as prod ready, so we don't need this sentenece

## Open questions

This it stands this proposal does not cover any multi tenancy aspects of the
receive component there are two strategies that we could go with:

> * Have a configurable label that determines the tenant in requests.

Reviewer: I think all of those can be iterated on while we have this implemented :hugs:

Reviewer 2: :+1: I like the open questions section

Author: added a first solution to the proposal and left the alternative tenancy solution as a possible exploration in the future

---

> title: Scalable rule storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Scalable Rule Storage
```

Author: done

type: proposal
menu: proposals

> status: proposed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
status: approved
```

Author: done :)

[`--query.config`, and
`--query.config-file`](https://thanos.io/components/rule.md/#query-api)
* `--tenant-label-name` which label-value to use to set the tenant to be communicated to the receive component

If any of these are specified the ruler would run a stateless mode, without
local storage, and instead writing samples to the configured remote server,
which must implement the `storepb.WritableStore` gRPC service.

## Alternatives

Continue to allow spreading load only by functionally sharding rules.

## Work Plan

Implement functionality alongside the existing architecture of the rule
component.

## Open questions

### Multi tenancy model

This it stands this proposal does not cover any multi tenancy aspects of the
receive component there are two strategies that we could go with:

* Have a configurable label that determines the tenant in requests.
* Change the receive component to instead of using a header to determine the
  tenant use a label of the series being written.

As the first exists, this proposal will continue with this approach and
potentially reevaluate in the future.

### Removal of embedded TSDB

> For a start this functionality will be implemented alongside the current

Reviewer: Hm, I know it's future, but I think there is also option to run receiver as library (inside process)

Author: added
